Observations
  How to define in ModelMuse
    For MODFLOW-2005 etc., use existing methods.
    For MODFLOW 6 and SUTRA define them the same way they are defined in MODFLOW-2005.
    For all programs, consider what additional knds  of observations could be extracted from output files.
      For MODFLOW-2005, HYD and GAGE package output might be appropriate.
      For SUTRA, consider additional output file types generated by SUTRA.
    Allow for derived observations based on simple mathematical expressions between previously defined simple observations.
    Any programs for extracting observations must be compileable on Mac and Linux as well as Windows.
    Allow for flow direction observations
      
  How to make them available to PEST
    For MODFLOW-2005 etc., use the methods built into MODFLOW-2005
    For MODFLOW 6, write a program to extract observations from Observation Utility output with spatial and temporal interpolation to the location and time of the observation (done)
    For MODFLOW-2005, SUTRA,write programs  to extract observations from other output files.
    For all models, the simulated values should be written in a file with a simple format such as on each line there should be an observation name, observed value, and simulated value. Potentially allow a comment to be included with the observation and written to the output file.
    
  How to write instruction file
    Write instuction file in conjunction with writing the observations.

Parameters
  How to define in ModelMuse
    Use existing methods but with additional parameter types and also use in MODFLOW 6 and SUTRA
    Parameters of similar type can not have overlapping areas of influence. 
      Use text data arrays to define where a particular object applies.
      For things like GHB, you could calibrate conductance or external head but not both at the same location and time.
    Within the zone for each parameter, there can be one or more pilot points.
    For boundary conditions, have the user select one parameter per time period per object instead of allowing multiple parameters to apply at the same time to the same object.
      Example: the user might want to calibrate summer and winter recharge rates separately but use the same object to specify where those rates apply.
    Allow definition of derived parameters that are derived by simple mathematical expressions (possibly with spatial data).
      Example GHB conductance could depend on a K parameter.
      Should it depend on the K parameter itself or on the K value at a locations?
    
  How to make them available to PEST
  How to write parameter template file (with pilot points)

Control File
  What is required for the control file
  
linear uncertainty analysis and then nonlinear uncertainty analysis.  
  How are these supported?

Results
  How to import updated parameter values into ModelMuse
  
Other
  Is there anything special required to allow users to emply pyEMU and FloPy with files generated by ModelMuse?

Time Series files in MODFLOW 6
  Allow externally generated Time Series files (but don't mess with them?).
  Allow internal Time Series files and allow usage of parameter as a scale factor.
  Allow for parameters that specify scale factor, additive value
  Have option to make a graph of value vs time and allow it to reflect how the graph changes with different scale factor and additive values.
  
Quote from Dahlstrom  
The following PEST/Calibration related tasks can be cumbersome and a well thought out way to do it in a  GUI may be helpful:
o Pilot Points
o Regularization
Time Series
o Heuristic constraints
o Flow direction observations
Head difference observations

Quote from Girma
Question 2- time series data, usually the time series data are obtained through observations. Regarding the scale factor, I was struggling to use constant multiplier for the whole time series. Varying recharge based on rainfall magnitude make some sense but I think it may difficult to implement. It is also good to account the threshold of rainfall below which recharge is not taking place during the scale factor. If there is an option to include this threshold as calibration, parameter may help a lot. Also good to have scale factor that can vary with stress period. E.g. monthly stress period may have 12-scale factor, which can be applied uniformly for the whole time series.

Quote from Groff
I have been considering the use of wetland delineation boundaries to generate an objective function for PEST. The objective would be some composite for points along the wetland boundary of the difference (l1 or l2) from 14 consecutive days during the growing season with a head greater than 1 foot below the ground surface. Construction of the objective would require determination of the number of consecutive days meeting the criteria, determine the difference from 14 days, and aggregate the differences for all the points along the boundary, but I am not sure how to set up this objective in PEST