release.txt

                          ModelMate Release Notes
                          
This file describes changes introduced into ModelMate with each official 
release.

NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive purposes 
      only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.
      
o Version 1.0.3 2/16/2016

    This version fixes two bugs.
    
    Bug fixed: ModelMate would fail to open on certain computers.
    
    Bug fixed: Use of the menu item:
    "Model | Create Instruction Files for Files Defined in ModelMuse"
    would generate an error message if the names of observation groups
    included unexpected names. With the current version, instruction files
    are created for recognized group names, and other observation groups
    are ignored.

o Version 1.0.2 11/19/2013

    This version fixes a number of bugs and includes several minor 
    enhancements.

    Bug fixed: Flickering in the Observation Groups table of Observations 
    window.
    
    Bug fixed: Head observations in which multilayer head observations have 
    the layers and proportions specified on multiple lines were not read 
    correctly.
    
    Bug fixed: Observation names were not read correctly when the names are 
    surrounded by quotes.
    
    Bug fixed: Import of a UCODE input file did not function correctly when 
    input file uses blockformat FILES.
    
    Bug fixed: Observations were not cleared when the  File | New Project menu 
    item was selected.
    
    Support was added for the WAITRUNNERS variable of the Parallel_Control 
    input block of JUPITER API version 1.5.0 and UCODE_2005 version 1.022.  
    WAITRUNNERS can be set on the UCODE Parallel-Processing Control window.
    
    Wording was clarified for error message related to non-standard group 
    names found when constructing instruction files for observations defined 
    in ModelMuse.
    
    Error checking was enhanced for the "Model-input and template files" and 
    "Model-output and instruction files" windows.

    Visual elements were adjusted to be fully visible when ModelMate is run 
    under Windows 7.
    
o Version 1.0.1 6/4/2012
    
    Bug fixed: Observation Table did not show new observation added using 
    "Add Observation" button.
    
    Visual elements were adjusted to be fully visible when ModelMate is run 
    under Windows 7.

o Version 1.0.0 5/2/2011
    Initial release of ModelMate.
